Cystic fibrosis affects 30,000 children and young adults in the US alone
Inhaling the mists of salt water can reduce the pus and infection that fills the airways of cystic fibrosis sufferers, although side effects include a nasty coughing fit and a harsh taste. 
That's the conclusion of two studies published in this week's issue of The New England Journal of Medicine.
They found that inhaling a mist with a salt content of 7 or 9% improved lung function and, in some cases, produced less absenteeism from school or work. 
Cystic fibrosis, a progressive and frequently fatal genetic disease that affects about 30,000 young adults and children in the US alone, is marked by a thickening of the mucus which makes it harder to clear the lungs of debris and bacteria. 
The salt water solution "really opens up a new avenue for approaching patients with cystic fibrosis and how to treat them," says Dr Gail Weinmann, of the US National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, which sponsored one of the studies. 
Mark Elkins of the Royal Prince Alfred Hospital in Sydney, Australia and colleagues authored one of the new published studies.
The team found that the 83 volunteers who regularly inhaled a 7% mist of salty water had fewer breathing problems and less absenteeism from school or work than those who inhaled a solution with a salt content of under 1%. 
"Adding salt [and water] to the airway surfaces of patients with cystic fibrosis is beneficial" for both children and adults, they conclude. 
All of the patients first inhaled a chemical to try to open their lung passages as much as possible.
In the second study, US-based Assistant Profsesor Scott Donaldson of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and his colleagues found that a 7% salt mist "produced a sustained acceleration of mucus clearance and improved lung function" because it helped hydrate the lungs.
In an accompanying editorial, Dr Felix Ratjen of the Hospital for Sick Children in Toronto, Canada, cited several unpleasant side effects of the salt mist treatment including a bad taste, coughing fits and the lengthy 30 minutes it can take to administer. 
He added that in the study by Elkins and team, patients may not have received the best long-term antibiotic treatment. 
That would make the inhaled salt water mist appear more effective than it would have been if people were getting a better drug, says Ratjen. 
Weinmann says limitations inherent to the treatment mean a salt water mist "may be just a first step" in treating cystic fibrosis.
Scientists have rescued a mouse immune system that was overwhelmed by a systemic blood infection. But will this work in humans?
Scientists have discovered how infections that invade the whole body, like malaria, disable the immune system and prevent it from detecting and fighting other microorganisms.
The Australian and German researchers say the discovery may help scientists to develop vaccines that restore immunity in people with systemic or 'whole body' infections. 
They publish their research today online in the journal Nature Immunology.
The immune response is alerted when specialised sentries of the immune system, dendritic cells, detect a virus or bacteria.
They alert the immune system by capturing infected cells and displaying fragments or antigens of the pathogen on their surface in a process called cross-presentation.  
Lead researcher Dr Jose Villadangos, an immunologist from the Walter and Eliza Institute of Medical Research in Melbourne, says systemic infections such as malaria or sepsis, a bacterial infection of the blood, overstimulate dendritic cells.
This results in the immune system's critical alarm system shutting down.
"This doesn't occur in local infections because only a few dendritic cells are involved," Villadangos says.
"But in the case of malaria infections and sepsis, dendritic cells throughout the body are concentrated on alerting the immune system, which prevents them from detecting and responding to any new infections." 
A new type of vaccine?
Villadangos and colleagues managed to restore immunity in mice with an immune system compromised by sepsis.
They injected them with a live vaccine made of dendritic cells that had been exposed to a secondary virus in the laboratory, and subsequently displayed antigens of that virus. 
Villadangos says the findings show the missing link in the immunosupressed animal is the capacity of the dendritic cells to display the antigens of new viruses. 
